














TDT4171 Artificial Intelligence Methods
 Exercise 3
Edgar Vedvik -- edgarmv@stud.ntnu.no
2017-03-03






Introduction
    In this exercise we were tasked with creating a decision support system for
    a decision problem of our own choice. The exercise listed some examples,
    and one of the examples was exactly a problem I was facing this week:
    Should I go out on Friday or stay home doing this exercise? Next week
    I had many exercises that were due. I also had plans to go to an event
    Saturday evening. Therefore, I had good reason to stay home. However, as
    we all know, staying home Friday night doing exercises, while all your
    friends are out, isn't much fun.
    
    The exercise required that we had to measure the success of our choice. I
    measured this as the quality of life I would achieve when making this
    choice. The exercise also required that this decision problem had to
    contain at least 10 variables, and that half of them would have to be
    uncertain at the time the decision was made.

    The decision problem was modelled in GeNIe, which is a graphical user
    interface for solving just such a problem. GeNIe's interface was relatively
    easy to work with once I learned how to create nodes and connect them
    together and adding probabilities.

Model

    Once I had chosen what decision problem to model, and my utility function.
    I followed the steps recommended in [pp. 634]artificial to create
    the model. The first step was to create a causal model. This meant making a
    dependency graph, with lines between each dependency. I identified the
    following variables as directly affecting my quality of life:
    
        Will I finish the exercise in time?
        Did I have a good time Friday night?
        The amount of money I have.
        My physical state (hungover / tired / well rested)
    

    All of these variables are influenced by many other variables. Including
    all the variables is not in the scope of this report, but I have
    included those I found most important:

    
        Exercise deadline.
        How much of the exercise have i already done (progress).
        Are my friends going out on Friday?
        Did I work this week?
        Did I go out on Thursday?
        Do I have plans on Saturday?
        Will I make those plans?
    

    







    After adding all those variables and identifying how they relate to each
    other I ended up with the result shown in Figure .

    The second step was to simplify and remove variables that did not affect the
    decision. Because my model was so simple and all variables affected my
    utility function, I skipped this step.

    Next step was to assign probability to each unknown state. Some of these
    were simple, like whether my friends are going out, if I have to
    work this week and the probability of going out on a Thursday. None of
    these variables depended on other variables, making figuring out the
    probability as easy as just remembering how often these things happen.

    With all the edge variables and decisions added, the more complex variables
    had to be created. These are also based mostly on empirical evidence. The
    most complex probability table was the Will finish exercise in time,
    which depended on when the deadline was, my progress on the exercise and
    whether I would go out on Friday. Since both deadline and progress had
    three values to choose from, making it a 18x2 big probability table. A
    small piece of it can be seen in Table .

    
















    The next step was to assign utilities. I decided to use an additive utility
    model because it seemed natural for this problem. My quality of life is
    improved more by finishing the exercise than being well rested for example.
    The value of each variable affecting my quality of life can be seen in
    Table . 

    












    
    I decided that my utility function should be the change in my quality of
    life. Meaning that it could be both negative and positive. My utility
    function therefore adds the inverse value for the inverse variable. For
    example, not finishing the exercise would add minus nine to the utility
    function. This does not apply to the money variable, since it is not a
    yes/no variable. With this, the best achievable quality of life is 27 and
    the worst is -22.

    [pp. 634]artificial suggests two more steps: verify and refine the
    model and perform sensitivity analysis. These two steps were done in
    paralell with the previous steps. Whenever a variable got a value that
    did not match with my perception of it, I went back and adjusted the
    probabilities.



Results
    After following all the steps, I ended up with the model seen in Figure
    . I have entered evidence such as when the exercise is due
    and how much of it I had done. I also had plans Saturday so I entered that
    as well. The difference in staying home, doing exercise and going out are
    not that big, with only a difference in 1.5 between them. Regardless of my
    choice, my quality of life would improve,

    






    To make sure my model was good, I tried out a few other scenarios. The
    results can be seen in Table  and Table
    .

    










    If the exercise is due tomorrow, quality of life drops significantly
    regardless of my choice, but drops much more if I go out. It also matters
    very little whether the exercise is due next week or the week after, which
    is as expected since I usually don't do exercises that are due more than a
    week from now.

    










    If I do not plan on going out on Saturday, going out on Friday increases
    by about 4. This makes sense since I usually go out on at least Friday or
    Saturday. There is also a slight increase in staying home if I have no plan
    on Saturday. This points to that my model is not perfect, since ideally
    this should stay the same, or go down slightly.

Discussion
    Overall, the results from my model matches my expectations. My quality of
    life increases regardless of my choice, since either I get to have fun or I
    am one exercise closer to being done for this semester. Both of which
    affects my life in a positive way. 

    There were, however, some inconsistencies. If I did not have plans on
    Saturday I expected the model to show a slight decrease in life quality if
    I then chose to not go out on Friday. However, my model gave it a slight
    increase. This is because, in my model, the quality of life is not
    dependent on a did I go out this weekend variable, which it should
    have been.



apacite


